Add generic guide to setup devcontainer environment (#2227)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: docs/setup_devcontainer_environment.mdx

1. run following command in windows terminal which will install needed features to run WSL and installs the default Ubuntu distribution

    ```batch
    wsl --install
    ```

2. check WSL version, if version is already 2, skip the "set wsl version" step

    ```batch
    wsl -l -v
    ```

3. set WSL version to 2 if neccessary (_replace `<distro name>` by the installed distribution name, see output above_)

    ```batch
    wsl --set-version <distro name> 2
    ```

### Enable systemd support in WSL2

Since docker engine is installed as systemd service, we need to ensure, systemd support is enabled in the WSL2

1. start wsl shell by issuing just the `wsl` command in the windows terminal
2. add the following lines to the `/etc/wsl.conf`, you will need to open the file with root privileges (_eg. `sudo nano /etc/wsl.conf`_)

    ```raw
    [boot]
    systemd=true
    ```

3. shutdown WSL2 with following command on windows terminal

    ```batch
    wsl --shutdown
    ```

4. start wsl shell again and run the following command to check that systemd is running

    ```shell
    systemctl list-units
    ```

### Follow "Setup on linux"

> From here you can follow the [Setup on linux](#setup-on-linux) instructions bellow. Use the installed WSL2 distribution (_default is Ubuntu_) when choosing the correct steps to install docker engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this point on, you can follow the [Setup on Linux](#setup-on-linux) instructions below. When choosing the correct steps to install the docker engine, use the installed WSL2 distribution (the default is Ubuntu).
```

> ## Setup on linux

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setup on Linux
```

:::tip
**Quick start guide**

> - install [docker engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) based on your linux distribution
> - fork and clone the desired code repository
> - [Fork the repository and start the devcontainer](#fork-the-repository-and-start-the-devcontainer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Install the [Docker engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) based on your Linux distribution.
- Fork and clone the desired code repository.
- [Start the devcontainer](#fork-the-repository-and-start-the-devcontainer).
```

:::

### Install Docker Engine

> Since these instructions vary based on your used linux distribution, we only provide a rough overview. For detailed instructions, follow the official [docker engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) install guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since these instructions vary depending on your Linux distribution, we only provide a rough overview. For detailed instructions, follow the official [Docker engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) install guide.
```

> 1. update all installed packages
> 2. add docker repository to package repository (_eq. yum or apt_)
> 3. reload package repository cache
> 4. install docker engine components
> 5. follow the [Linux post-installation steps for Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/#manage-docker-as-a-non-root-user) instructions to allow non-root users using docker 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update all installed packages.
2. Add the Docker repository for your package manager (_like `yum` or `apt`_).
3. Update your package repository package index.
4. Install the Docker engine packages.
5. Follow the [Linux post-installation steps for Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/#manage-docker-as-a-non-root-user) instructions to allow non-root users to use Docker.
```

## Setup on macOS

:::tip
**Quick start guide**

> - install [docker desktop](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/)
> - fork and clone the desired code repository
> - [Fork the repository and start the devcontainer](#fork-the-repository-and-start-the-devcontainer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Install [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/).
- Dork and clone the desired code repository.
- [Start the devcontainer](#fork-the-repository-and-start-the-devcontainer).
```

:::

### Install Docker Desktop

Since the installation steps are well documented and may change over time, we refer to the official [Install Docker Desktop on Mac](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/) guide.

## Fork the repository and start the devcontainer

> Since this might slightly differ between our code repositories, the following is just a generic guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this slightly differs between our code repositories, the following is a generic guide.
```

> 1. open the desired code repository on github (_eq. [Home Assistant core repository](https://github.com/home-assistant/core)_) and click on "fork"
> 2. once your fork is created, copy the URL of your fork and clone it to a local directory (_eq. your home_)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Ppen the desired code repository on GitHub (_for example, the [Home Assistant Core repository](https://github.com/home-assistant/core)_), and click on "fork".
2. Once your fork is created, copy the URL of your fork and clone it to a local directory on your computer.
```

    ```shell
    cd $HOME
    git clone <URL>
    ```

> 3. change into the directory of your fork and start Visual Studio Code from there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Change into the directory of your fork and start Visual Studio Code from there:
```

    ```shell
    cd <FORKNAME>
    code .
    ```

> 4. Visual Studio Code will automatically detect the devcontainer and prompt to "Reopen in Container" (_bottom right corner_) - click on it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Visual Studio Code will automatically detect the devcontainer and prompt to "Reopen in Container" (_bottom right corner_) - click on it.
```

Reviewer: A screenshot of the popup might help here maybe?

---
title: "Setting Up a Devcontainer Development Environment"
---

The easiest way to get started with development is to use Visual Studio Code with [devcontainers](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/containers). This approach creates a preconfigured development environment with the necessary tools. This approach is enabled for all Home Assistant repositories. Since the Docker-based devcontainer concept provides a layer of abstraction, the following guides merge at one point.

First, install [Visual Studio code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), next follow one of the next chapters based on your system.

## Setup on Windows

:::tip
**Quick start guide**

- Install [WSL2](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) and enable [systemd support](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/commandline/systemd-support-is-now-available-in-wsl/).
- Install the [Docker engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) based on your selected WSL2 Linux distribution.

> - Fork and clone the desired code repository.

Reviewer 2: Should it be documented to clone the desired code within WSL?
I think there are performance differences if the repo is cloned in Windows and not inside WSL.

Author: yeah you're right ... for me it is common to do it within the wsl2, but for new developers it might not be that obvious.

## Setup on macOS

:::tip
**Quick start guide**

- Install [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/).
- Fork and clone the desired code repository.
- [Start the devcontainer](#fork-the-repository-and-start-the-devcontainer).

:::

### Install Docker Desktop

Since the installation steps are well documented and may change over time, we refer to the official [Install Docker Desktop on Mac](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/) guide.

## Fork the repository and start the devcontainer

Since this slightly differs between our code repositories, the following is a generic guide.

1. Open the desired code repository on GitHub (_for example, the [Home Assistant Core repository](https://github.com/home-assistant/core)_), and click on "fork".
2. Once your fork is created, copy the URL of your fork and clone it to a local directory on your computer.

    ```shell
    cd $HOME
    git clone <URL>
    ```

3. Change into the directory of your fork and start Visual Studio Code from there:

    ```shell
    cd <FORKNAME>
    code .
    ```

> 4. Visual Studio Code will automatically detect the devcontainer and prompt to "Reopen in Container" (_bottom right corner_) - click on it.

Author: you will find already the screenshot below embedded into a `<p>` html tag
